cancer is increasing throughout the
world we have 1,700 people a day dying
the argument is oh there must be
something wrong with those experiments
when it's said over and over and over
again it's mentioned that all textbooks
all biology biochemistry cell biology
textbooks the NIH is saying this every
major hospital is saying this how could
it not be so it's a denial what we have
here is no exercise uh emotional stress
poor food poor sleep no friends
unhappiness all of these things together
and now we are put ourselves at risk for
all of these different problems cancer
being one of them Professor Thomas sea a
world-renowned expert in cancer biology
genetics and biochemistry who spent over
30 years challenging the conventional
understanding of cancer with nearly 2
million new cases diagnosed every year
in the United States alone it's clear
the current approach tocer is falling
short globally the numbers are
staggering and they're only expected to
get worse why cancer has become so
widespread in our society clear evidence
massively clear evidence we have a diet
and Life Style and our technology has
evolved so much faster than our biology
that cancer is caused
by hi professor Saed I'm so excited to
have you on the podcast I am a an
admirer of your work and your book and I
want to first get into it by asking you
this question maybe a bit loaded but can
you give me your top beliefs on what or
why cancer has become so widespread in
our
society well cancer is increasing uh it
seems like it's throughout the world um
and of course in in our society as well
but it's not one
thing um we know about the oncogenic
Paradox we solved that that that was a
paradox put out by the uh Noel laurate U
Albert senture
who called the Paradox how is it
possible that so many things have been
recognized to be provocative towards
cancer and uh we can't figure out the
common pathophysiological mechanism for
this Paradox so we are accumulating in
our society large numbers of toxins uh
we have a diet and lifestyle that's
provocative to uh cancer cancer is what
we refer to as cell division out of
control or disregulated cell growth
which can happen in any part of the body
so so we we have a diet and lifestyle
that's extremely provocative for the
development of cancer coupled with
toxins in the environment that work
together with the diet and lifestyle uh
all contributing to this problem and
when you have um uh um what what we have
here is no exercise uh emotional stress
poor food poor sleep no friends um
unhappiness uh all of these things
together uh with uh uh foods that are
poorly nutritious uh full of uh highly
processed carbohydrates and you have an
epidemic of cancer diabetes obesity uh
cardiovascular it's not a mystery uh
this this diet and lifestyle in our
environment today is deviates so so much
from how we evolved as a species
hundreds of thousands of years ago so uh
as I tell many folks uh we are a
Paleolithic man living in a modern tech
environment and uh our technology has
evolved so much faster than our biology
and now we are put ourselves at risk for
all of these different uh problems
cancer being one of them so it's not one
thing it's a whole constellation of
things all impacting us together uh at
this time in place so what what is
cancer of the metabolism so when you're
you're when you're speaking right now
I'm guessing that you are separating
genetics from sporadic cancer correct
because genetic cancer I mean I don't
know leukemia these things that
sometimes you think but how are they how
did a child get cancer well you have to
separate what we call germline cancer
from from somatic there's two kinds of
mutations that you see in cancer uh
they're called germline mutations uh
like bracka one p-53 free Leaf many
there's a retinoblastoma there's a lot
of these they're risk they're genetic
risk factors um and then we have what we
call somatic mutations these are
mutations that you find in cancer cells
you didn't inherit these they they were
acquired um from uh being alive and
cells dividing and this kind of thing
such as lung cancer well any any cancer
you you got to separate out the germ
line those that are inherited through
the
passed on from one generation to the
next uh like the p-53 mutation uh which
affects mitochondrial function um cyto
cytochrome C oxidase 2 uh thereby
reducing the efficiency of energy
metabolism in the mitochondria of those
folks leading to a tumor in the brain or
ovary or some place like this um but
it's not 100% penetrant so we need to
know about genetics we need to know
about penet
if if like for example huntingon disease
is a neurological disorder caused by a
mutation in the gene called hunting tin
anyone who inherits that mutation in
that Gene will develop the the
neurological problem 100% that's
chromosome 4 right yeah it's a
chromosome 4 but it's 100% penetrant
yeah all right um but in cancer we have
no Gene that's known to be 100%
penetrant so people some people the
highest penetrants we have is the leaf
any p53 which is about
88% penetrant meaning that 12% of the
people about
12% uh would carry that mutation their
whole life and never present with a
tumor so um so that means there's there
there so there would be a high high risk
factor many other cancer like braa one
braa 2 these bre breast cancer uh
mutations um about 50% of women uh would
would develop tumor from carrying that
Gene but 50% won't so it's a risk factor
it's not 100% penetrate meaning it's not
a feta complete that you're going to get
the disease with that um those are
germline Cancers okay so so you know you
you hear about Angelina Jolie having her
breasts and ovaries removed as a
prophylactic because she family carries
the gene um but you know there's diet
lifestyle issues that you could do to
also significantly reduce your risk even
though you might carry the gene but but
if you look at most cancers just take
the tissue out of the person's body
whether it's a brain tumor colon tumor
breast tumor lung tumor bladder tumor L
uh melanoma you you see tens of
thousands millions of
mutations in the nuclei of these cancers
um and the National Cancer Institute
calls cancer a genetic disease caused by
these somatic mutations uh that's why
people call cancer is a genetic disease
because you do find you do find M
mutations uh in the uh in in these
cancers what what we and others have
shown is that they're largely Irrelevant
for the most part they come they come as
Downstream effects of damage to the the
ability of the cell to generate energy
through using oxygen and uh they're an
effect of the reactive oxygen species
coming from damage to the energy organel
that generates energy called the
mitochondria so yes you do find all
these mutations uh uh in cancer cells
but as I said most of them are largely
irrelevant to the they come as a an
effect not as a cause they don't cause
so this is where we differ between the
National Cancer Institute which says on
their website that cancer is caused by
genetic mutations uh that by mutations
in the genomic DNA of the nucleus this
is the somatic mutation Theory yes and
we clearly say that can it's absolutely
impossible for that to happen because we
have we have uh we have found driver
genes in in normal cells that never
develop cancer and we have some cancers
that have no somatic
mutations uh and we did the nuclear
transfer experiments my uh we looked at
the data from those experiments and they
clearly show that a nucleus full of
cancer mutations placed into a new
cytoplasm a normal cytoplasm with normal
mitochondria does not form disregulated
cell growth so clearly the cytoplasm
suppresses whatever the mutations might
be in the nucleus so we we have we have
clear evidence massively clear evidence
that cancer is not a genetic disease
it's a metabolic disorder because all
cancers suffer a very similar problem
they're all dependent on on fermentation
for energy not oxidative
phosphorilation so I mean we can break
that all down yeah but the issue is the
misinformation the misunderstanding in
the country and the world today is that
cancer is a genetic disease nothing can
be further from the truth they either do
not look at the data or they don't
understand the massive evidence to say
that cannot be the case how is it
possible for a such a large conglomerate
to a not look at the data and B not
understand it confirmation biased and
Dogma ideological Dogma I'm tell how is
it possible that someone of one religion
a devout member of a religion could all
of a sudden drop it and immediately
Embrace another religion simp doesn't
happen somebody would rather die than do
this if you're one political if you're a
Republican and it died in the will
Republican you're not going to vote de
Democrat and vice versa even though you
might have the greatest candidate the
greatest platform that would support
your very life you will not change this
is called Dogma um and then you have
confirmation bias is a situ ation where
oh
everybody when when when the when it's
said over and over and over again it's
mentioned in all textbooks that cancer
is a genetic disease all biology
biochemistry cell biology textbooks the
NIH is saying this every major hospital
is saying this everybody says it's a
genetic disease how could you not how
could it not be uh and then you read the
literatures just absolutely say that
this cannot be what the argument is oh
there must be something wrong with those
experiments um so it's a
denial it it's abs a denial but I think
the Young Folks come along who have not
been indoctrinated into the genetic
theory and they start looking at it with
fresh eyes and and say oh my God this
how can anyone with any degree of
cognitive capability think this could be
a genetic disease when there's so much
evidence to say it can't be so that's
the conundrum right now and you it's
very hard to get somebody to accept a
new idea when their salary depends on
them not accepting
it there's a lot of factors that prevent
them from wanting to make this change
well I'm excited for you to teach us a
new paradigm um one that hopefully we're
all going to shift I um I think in order
to have a a well constructed
conversation we need to understand what
the metabolism is and we can start with
the
mitochondria well the mitochondria are
are an organel inside the cell or we
have a cell just like we have organs in
our body the liver the kidneys the
spleen these are organs in our body we
have different uh uh um
organel structures inside a cell the
nucleus everybody's familiar with the
nucleus contains the genetic material
and then we have the GG and then we have
the ribosomes and we have the lomes but
we also have another organel called the
mitochondrian and this is kind of a
spaghetti Network there's a lot they
fuse and they Fizz it's a second
organism inside one organism this came
came about um um about two two billion
years ago
uh when two organisms fuse together uh
one organism able to use oxygen and the
other organism not able to use oxygen so
what happens then is these two organisms
fused allowed a division of energy labor
leading to multicellular organisms
metazoans which we are the eventual
descendants of these multicellular
processes this all came about as having
an organel that could capture oxygen and
use it as an acceptor of elect R thereby
producing energy so much more
efficiently with minimal fuel um before
that happened all the cells on the
planet the living organisms were mostly
single cell organisms that would divide
rapidly uncontrolled division uh uh
unbridled proliferation and this would
stop once the fermentable fuels that was
be fuels to be used without oxygen
because originally our Earth had no
oxygen don't forget get it was a very
hypoxic environment there was no oxygen
oxygen was created by these bacteria
that produced oxygen so so so then we so
that that little organel became the
mitochondrian so uh the mitochondria is
in all the cells of our body uh when
fertilization happens the egg uh has the
mitochondria and as the organism
develops the mitochondria becomes semi
differentiated into the different organs
and systems but all but basically
they're responsible for producing the
highly Energy Efficiency that's why you
and I are breathing right now we we're
taking in oxygen so I can know what I'm
saying and say something and look at you
you can look at me and we don't have to
worry about our our intestines we don't
have to worry about our lungs all this
is working because they're highly energy
efficient um so and that's driven by
these little organ Els call called the
mitochondria and when cells divide they
divide uh they have their own division
by the way uh but they pretty much
control uh they they under they control
the differentiated quiescent state of
our cells and when our cells need to
grow to replace dead and dying cells
through to wear and tail tear they are
very uh regulatory to allow our cells to
replace those that have died or or need
we need new cells in a very ordered way
so they control the destiny of all of
our cells so when that organel becomes
corrupted and can no longer do that
efficiently these cells fall back on the
ancient fermentation Pathways which is
unbridled proliferation so the default
state which is what happens when you no
longer have this control is rapid
proliferation that's exactly what cancer
cells are doing they're falling back on
these ancient fermentation Pathways
because the organel that controls their
Destiny and their growth and their
quiescent has become corrupted and
therefore these cells fall back and then
when they fall back on this
proliferation you can't live without
energy ATP so how do they get ATP well
they get it through non-oxidative
procedures called fermentation and then
what we found in others what do they
what are the fuels that drive
fermentation and that becomes the sugar
glucose and the amino acid glutamine we
just published a big paper just came out
in in Twitter today yesterday showing
how cancer cells in brain tumors brain
cancer cells are are driven by by two
prime fuels glucose and glutamine and I
I I don't there's another fermentation
mechanism that happens inside the
mitochondria that's why the paper is so
big because we have to find a second
fermentation pathway inside the organel
that's supposed to respire it's
unbelievable I I I'm sorry I have to be
uh no this is brilliant this is so
interesting to me so basically what
you're saying is the breakdown of the
mitochondria is the reason for for this
the disregulation and dysfunction of the
mitochondria and it's also the reason
reason for the collection of mutations
in the nucleus that everybody thinks are
important so when the mitochondria
become corrupted over time it doesn't
happen overnight if it happens quickly
the cell dies and never becomes a cancer
that's what warberg said and we found I
was going to ask you about Auto well
I'll get i'll get to him in a minute get
there but but when you have this
dysfunctional mitochondria it produces
reactive oxygen species radicals
radicals they damage DNA RNA and protein
so most of the genetic damage in that
you see in the nucle
the mutations that everybody is focusing
on not everybody but majority of the
cancer people are focusing on those
mutations they're caused by the the
abnormal abnormal radicals coming out of
the damaged mitochondria because the
because those radicals are carcinogenic
and mutogenic they cause the mutations
that people are studying so we're the
majority of people in the cancer field
are studying things that are Downstream
epiphenomena they're not the they
they're the they're an effect they're
not the cause now because of that that's
why the cancer epidemic is continuing to
go because we have 1,700 people a day
dying in this country every day from
cancer that's 70 an hour 600 almost
12,000 per year at least in
2024 and that's because we're not
focusing on the really important issue
of of what's what's causing these cell
to grow disregulated and how do you stop
this very easy to stop them you just
pull the plug on the their fermentation
fuels but you won't do that if you've
been indoctrinated to think that cancer
is a genetic disease oh I think there's
also an education and public health
issue here a public health yes we've
just established that but how many
people understand really you know I talk
to people on a daily basis the average
person doesn't really understand what
the mitochondria is or phosphorilation
and the fermentation process so when you
say pull the plug what does that
actually mean well it's not only the guy
on the street it's the guy in the top
medical schools as well absolutely yeah
so you're not just talking about the guy
on the street you know he has an excuse
he has an excuse not to know but the
guys in the top pharmaceutical companies
medical schools and the NIH should know
and they that's what that's the Dogma
that's what I'm saying you you can't
blame some guy who's never been trained
to know what what this is but you but
you certainly can blame somebody that
should know and and refuses not to know
that's the problem right there so so um
so so anyway that that's why we have
this tragedy
and uh and it's a refusal on the part of
the
academic uh because of the dogma and
it's because of the the consensus bias
that's what it is and because of the the
amount of money generated from current
cancer therapies is enormous you know
everybody's backs slapping and having a
good time well we got 1,700 people a day
dying from this disease miserably too I
guess what I'd love to understand is how
are we damaging the mitochondria through
lifestyle habits and we can start we can
separate them we can first start with
nutrition that might be the easiest one
to start with well I don't know if
that's the easiest one to start with
because um it's very vague and it's and
it's not clear I mean like what do you
say how does nutrition damage oxidative
phosphorilation right what is that
exactly okay so as I said when we look
at the oncogenic Paradox let's look at
the let's look at what that means
carcinogens okay we talk we call about
chemicals called carcinogens uh they're
and people know about oh I don't that
that item is a carcinogen stay away from
why because it's going to cause cancer
how does it cause cancer it gets into
the mitochondria and disrupts oxidative
phosphorilation gradually okay you put
that in that carcinogen in with a poor
diet and lifestyle and the probability
of getting a tumor might be increased
what does it mean so nutrition um
nutrition is a vague background uh
facilitator of some of the more
recognized provocative agents like
chronic inflammation okay what a chronic
inflammation okay measure people see
reactive protein in the bloodstream
that's kind of a marker of of
information you find a lot of folks that
are overweight obesity type 2 diabetes
they have elevated C reactive protein
that tells us they're already in an
inflamed state that inflammation with
bad nutrition and no exercise puts the
mitochondria in some cell in some in
some tissue at risk for uh damage to
oxidative phosphorilation radiation for
crying out loud people fear radiation
why because it's going to cause cancer
unless of course you have cancer then
they nuke you with the radiation that
make any sense right sometimes it does
work and and I don't want to throw
everything under the bus because a lot
of the things in the standard of care
can be effective the problem is a lot of
folks don't even know how to use those
uh those the correct way they'll either
kill their patients or they'll put
people at R the ones that do survive are
at risk for all kinds of uh damage to
mitoch condra in some population of
cells um intermittent hypoxia another
another provocative agent like sleep
apne and these kinds of things they put
intermittent hypoxia pressure on the
mitochondria uh causing them to to fall
back in a fermentation metabolism over
time and you put that together with poor
nutrition poor exercise and poor the the
rest of this and you put populations
that cell at risk what else age old do
you get you're more more likely to
damage oxidative phosphorilation what
about oncogenic viruses wow you got to
love those papiloma virus hepatitis C
viruses how they cause cancer they
actually get into the mitochondria
disrupt oxidative phosphorilation you're
in a poorly nutritious State you're
poorly uh processed carbs and all this
stuff and you put your body in
inflammation you put all these things
together come and pound out and reduce
the Energy Efficiency in a particular
population of cells in a particular
organ thereby leading to either breast
cancer colon cancer bladder cancer and
you can go down up and down the list and
find them ovarian cancer you know uh
uterine cancer uh lung cancer um you
know we've always said smoking causes
lung cancer we everybody okay so one of
the greatest reductions in cancer is
this is the anti-smoking campaigns from
the 1990s okay and and the the American
Cancer Society loves this they say oh
look at we've dropped cancer death rates
by 33% wow why because people stop
smoking is there any new therapy that's
come along to drop no it's all it's so
prevention prevention was the biggest
effect on reducing cancer death rates so
no do drugs or any of this kind of stuff
uh yeah people are living uh we have a
lot of what we call millions of cancer
survivors thereby the grace of God
surviving the the toxic poisons and all
the stuff they give you mutilations and
everything uh but those folks are mostly
damaged in some way not all of them but
the cancer survivors often die earlier
because they've been brutalized by a
medieval system yeah and they never feel
out of the woods uh they have depression
they psychiatric they have all kind of
other maladies because they've been
nuked and poisoned basically to make
them healthy and survive right I hate to
say this kind of stuff but this is this
is basically what it is I mean you can't
sugarcoat this stuff too much yeah no I
I I I completely agree with you I um
I've been going down this entire I think
in the last 3 weeks um everything just
keeps pointing back to metabolic health
and also insulin I don't know if uh what
your take is on insulin um as a driver
of metabolic dysfun function well I mean
why is insulin up because it's you're no
longer insulin your your gluc your
glucose your body is no longer
responding to elevated glucose so you
have insulin and sensitivity you know
most of this folks this is type two
diabetes insulin sensit I'm not I want
to separate type two from type one for
sure they're not the same but uh uh
obesity type two diabetes insulin
insensitivity symic inflammation I mean
it's all together in the same the same
pot but when you do metabolic therapy
inter inly enough you start uh
restricting the fermental ferment
fermentation fuels for cancer which I'll
disg glucose and glutamine but you also
um reduce inflammation you reduce
systemic inflammation uh you increase
elevation of Ketone bodies which are
really super fuels that really enhance
the health and vitality of
mitochondria but but nobody wants not
nobody it's hard for the for our members
of our society myself included to get
into nutritional ketosis I got to go
back and live like I was yeah like I was
some Paleolithic guy hunter gatherer um
and when you have you know doughnut
shops on every corner and delicate
Essence it becomes very hard to live
like the Paleolithic man um yeah and who
does who wants to live like that anyway
but but you roll the dice you take the
risk can you talk to me about the
discovery of glucose fermentation I
because I really want to understand that
and I also want to talk about uh Auto
warberg and his findings yeah well
warberg was the first to identify the
origin of cancer um uh it's a long story
uh basically uh he was thrown under the
bus when everybody thought um cancer
became a genetic disease or really
thought it was to be mutations so that
warberg was left behind but he all he
actually knew what was causing cancer we
we have cleared up uh a number of the
mistakes that warberg made so we've kind
of polished dusted off and polished off
his original hypothesis and developed
developed his original hypothesis now
into a theory the mitochondrial
metabolic theory of cancer yes but he
but he he originally saw that all major
cancers um had lower oxygen consumption
and kept throwing out uh lactic acid and
lactic acid is the waste product of of
of glucose fermentation it's it's called
lactic acid fermentation so and and he
argued that the reason why cancer cells
did this is because their
mitochondria uh were in some way
defective or damaged we now refer to it
as oxas insufficiency which is what
ultimately it comes down to um but what
was interesting about cancer is it
continued to ferment glucose or lactic
acid fermentation lactate is the waste
product of of of of glucose fermentation
and which appears then outside the cell
and and in the bloodstream and things
like like this even it does that even in
100% oxygen so why would a cancer cell
continue to ferment glucose in 100%
oxygen he he reasoned had to do
something with the mitochondria so his
his findings were based on biochemistry
readouts he never looked under they
didn't have the electron microscope back
in those days so he never was able to
look at mitochondria but I did and my
colleagues did and a number of people
have and every major cancer we look at
under the electron microscope we see
abnormalities in the structure of that
organel the very intricate structure of
the organel is abnormal and in
evolutionary biology structure
determines function if the structure of
the organel is abnormal the function of
the ab the organel will be abnormal and
warberg said they were abnormal they
were not taking in as much much oxygen
and they were continuing to ferment
glucose which should not happen in 100%
oxygen it only happens when you have
hypoxia and there was no hypoxia so why
are these tumor cells continuing to
ferment they had to ferment to stay
alive because oxidative phosphorilation
was inefficient so now let me give you
an example we will all do that under
certain conditions one of the conditions
is if we hold our breath long enough our
body will fill up with lactic acid if
you have a a a a heart attack where the
heart stops beating we fall down and our
bodies immediately start uh filling up
with lactic acid you turn it purple you
B and you what you notice in the in the
bloodstream is a immediate rise of
lactic acid and another uh acid called
suconic acid uh which is what alerted us
to the the fermentation of glutamine
it's not just glucose we discovered now
and that's our big finding here is that
there's an amino acid that actively
fermented along with glucose these two
fuels are being fermented and the waste
product is lactic acid from glucose and
suic acid from glutamine so when heart
attack when people have heart attacks
their bloodstream fills up with succinic
acid and lactic acid as soon as they
stop start breathing the lactic acid and
succinic acid go away okay because now
we're replacing fermentation back with
oxidative phosphorilation the cancer
cell continues to make lactic acid and
succinic acid even in the presence of
oxygen that tells us no uncertainty that
these cancer cells are being driven by a
fermentation metabolism and that because
oxidative phosphorilation is defective
how do you know that because you look
under the electron microscope and you
see the cells are damaged and they and
and the other thing they do is they
accumulate lipid drops in the cytoplasm
that's another marker because Normal
cells cells that are can that have
normal mitochondrial function will burn
lipids and Ketone bodies for energy
because they have a good they can use
oxygen and make and get energy from
fatty acids and Ketone bodies tumor
cells can't do that because they're
mitochondria defective they collect
lipid droplets in the cytoplasm and and
they store them there because if they
try to use them it'll kill the cell so
they store them as a protective
mechanism so so clearly we when we look
at cancer cells whether it's in the body
whether it's in the culture dish or
wherever the cells are screaming at us
biochemically and morphologically
telling us in no uncertain terms why
they are growing out of control so you
just have to be able to look at the
signs and understand what the cells are
telling you and make the decision that
wow these cells can't grow without
fermentation how do you kill them take
away the fermentation fuels just starve
them of glucose and glutamine so
glutamine I you know you were the first
one that um actually brought this to
light it's interesting and I I want to
go into what glutamine is as an amino
acid and how that's one of the drivers
along with glucose yeah well glutamine
well with the cancer field nose they
call it glutamine addiction uh they knew
cancer cells used a lot of glutamine uh
but they thought the glutamine was
respired that it's called anop rois
where glutamine comes into the the tri
Tri carboxilic acid cycle the kreb cycle
if you want to do it um and is fully
oxidized um in the kreb cycle uh what we
found is no that's not the case
glutamine is um metabolized to well it
goes through part of the cycle and
dumped out as succinic acid so now so in
order to grow glutamine is the most
abundant amino acid in our body if you
look at the a serum concentration of
amino acids I mean GL glutamine is like
half a Millar 500 micro it's very high
it's super high why is it so why is
glutamine so high in our bloodstream
among all the 20 amino acids that we
know are are are in biological systems
why is the glutamine so high well that's
a important amino acid because if we are
burned and we have bacteria from the
outside world getting into our body our
immune system macrofagos and lucites use
the glutamine powerfully to kill the
bacteria that enter our body so the IMM
our very immune system needs the
glutamine it's very dependent on on on
glutamine our Ura Ura cycle needs
glutamine our gut cells need glutamine
so glutamine is so ESS it's considered a
non-essential amino acid because we can
make it from glucose but it's really for
cancer it's an absolute essential amino
acid and the other thing is we've we've
shown no uncertain terms and very clear
that all metastatic cancers regardless
of where they come from are f are our
type of immune cell called the macras so
we know what the the metastatic invasive
cancer cell it's part of our own immune
system so once you know that and you
know what they eat and survive on now
you know how to kill them the problem is
why what I'm saying to you is that
natural killer cell activity yes well
natural killer cells are part of the
part of the kinds of cells they're kind
of a meenal they're in the macras Lucy
that that group of cells any one of
which could be have damaged oxidative
phosphorilation and then turn into a
metastatic cell sometimes Fusion Hybrid
we wrote All published all these papers
on this whole thing so so but they they
the field unfortunately keeps chasing
things related to genetic mutations
failing to see the very obvious things
that the cancer cells are telling us
because they're all focused on
Downstream epip phenomena so even though
I published these papers I clearly show
what's going on I clearly show how we ma
we can manage cancer very very
effectively without toxicity it's
ignored because the field is so hell
bent on thinking this is a damn genetic
disease when it's not so people say well
how the hell how come nobody knows what
you're talking about and for the life of
me it has to be some dogmatic thing
because anybody with a few functional
brain cells can look at the information
and say what the hell is going on here
how come nobody knows about
this could your theories stand then if
let's just say some body was diagnosed
with stage one cancer it's not
metastatic yet but stage one found a
tumor what what how do you challenge the
conventional cancer treatment for that
okay so what we do uh in a situation
like that and we have some big papers
coming out my press pulse paper I did
with some physician friends of mine uh
and we have a really big one coming out
any day now on managing gleo blastoma
but but it could also be it also could
be used for almost all cancers uh we
just put for GBM because nobody has any
anything we haven't made an advance in
gleo Blast 100 years so uh there's no
advance in that field we're going to
we're going to make a huge advance in
that once they once they come to realize
that it's a metabolic a metabolic
disease um but what was your question I
want I I wanted to know how you um how
you manage the conventional Cancer
Treatments if you been diagnosed with
stage one yeah stage one okay so uh
normally it would be diagnosed as a a
lump uh um some some indication that
there would be something going on person
goes to the physician they do something
I don't know they have a lesion or
something like this um uh okay good
we're going to use um we're going to use
non-invasive pet scan MRI CAT scan
something something that could identify
where this is maybe and get an idea from
the out an outside look at this the last
thing we want to do is stick it we don't
want to take a biopsy of it because you
could potentially spread it uh and
there's dozens of papers in the
scientific literature showing that uh
biopsies can spread cancer so we we
don't want to do that not a lot of
everybody but but but you know one out
of 500 people why would you put them at
risk for metastatic cancer and potential
a life-threatening illness just because
you want to look at some mutation and
things that are largely irrelevant so
you you just assume okay if it's a
benign tumor uh we we what we do is we
is we get a full blood work I don't do
this I'm not a physician I but my
friends do uh we get full comprehensive
blood work uh and then we bring uh the
glucose Ketone index gluc the the ratio
of glucose to Ketone Bodies In The Blood
using a the glucose meter Ketone meter
and bring it down and then start looking
at this tumor this go back and see if it
changes uh it's either not going to get
smaller most of the time it gets smaller
now if if if you shrink it down don't
forget what you're doing is you're
shrinking down any inflammation edema
anything associated with the micro
environment of that tumor and if you
look at the uh uh Imaging now you see
changes because this person has gone
through uh a restricted diet that it
doesn't have to be ketogen can be any
diet that brings your gki glucose Ketone
index to 2.0 or below and you do that
for 10 or 14 days and then you say oh my
God this tumor's changed now the surgeon
or the oncologist has the option to go
in and take it out completely take it
out completely just do a lumpectomy or a
surgical procedure that because now the
tumor is circumscribed now it's shrunken
down the inflammation is reduced edema
is red anything that would look
pathological is significantly reduced
then your probability of long-term
survival or possible cure is greatly
enhanced now if the person has a stage
four tumor where you already have Med
metastatic lesions outside the area
where it where it's supposed to be then
we have to be aggressive what we do is
we do the same kind of a thing uh and
now we bring in glutamine targeting
drugs drugs that will now go after the
glutamine so you bring the blood sugar
down get the low glucose Ketone index
down real low good we're shutting off
the glucose availability to this tumor
and now we're going to come in with
these strategic drugs the mostly uh re
re repurposed drugs uh right they don't
cost much money um and then you're going
to start hammering uh the gluc the
glutamine availability with the glucose
availability at the same time trans iing
the entire body over to ketones and
fatty acids which are burned by our
normal cells cells that have normal
mitochondria can burn the ketones and
the fatty acids where the tumor cells
can't so the tumor cells are now put at
a competitive disadvantage and you bring
down the inflammation you start to and
then you monitor again noninvasively you
begin to monitor those pet spots that
you see on pet scan uh they start to
disappear what did they go what happened
you know all of these lesions start to
disappear now and sometimes all lesions
disappear maybe except for one and then
you can go in and surgically remove that
on the other hand uh like we have seen
some of those Legions never go away they
just sit there in a kind of a dormant uh
indolent uh State um then you have to
consider options as you go forward like
we had a brain cancer guy with a gleo
blastoma that we never went away it just
it just grew so indolent he lived 10
years um uh with this gleo blastoma um
but he died from a a surgical a
hemorrhage from a surgical small
surgical debulking procedure but the
tumor never killed him so um but he
never he lived with it he lived 10 years
he had two kids he got married and all
this he if he did standard of care with
with radiation and chemo UPF front they
said he was going to live nine months or
12 months at the most he lived 10 years
because he avoided the radiation and all
that other stuff so so he also had an
idh1 mutation which gave him a a benefit
but but but but that beside the point
but we're seeing more and more people
live longer with a higher quality of
life does any does any of this cure
anybody um I I don't know uh all I know
is I get emails back from people that
should be dead they're still alive but
it could come back at any time and kill
them I I don't know but but the issue
here is we're we're seeing uh longer
survival with a higher quality of life
whether any of it leads to a cure
everybody wants a cure a cure you know
be happy you're living longer and a
higher quality of life you know correct
knows if you die from at 98 years old
from a heart attack when you had cancer
at 35 then we can say this guy was cured
but but but but we don't know and uh we
just know that we can we we have a much
better chance of putting cancer in a in
a less aggressive more indolent State uh
whether you get a cure or not we don't
know uh but you certainly feel a hell of
a lot better your energy is back your
your overall life is improved uh but
whether it's cure or not I don't know um
so this is where the future is going to
be the future will be metabolic therapy
uh for cancer and we can bring in that's
kind of like Precision medicine that's
kind of like what's happening now but
it's only reserved for high income
earners really well that Precision
medicine is is brutally imprecise that's
why we have hyperprogressive disease
with these immunotherapies so such as uh
hyper Progressive disease is where the
therapy kills you faster than the
disease does it's a term
hyperprogressive disease right so when
so precise let let's look at the
Precision wow we have a marker on a
tumor cell we're going to use this
immunotherapy just to kill those tumor
cells and sometimes you do sometimes it
works about 20% of the time you do
pretty well but sometimes they have
those same markers on your liver and
kidney so you blow out your liver and
kidney while you're trying to okay we we
got rid of your tumor but we also bleow
out your liver and kidney and now you
die from kidney and kidney and liver
failure so how precise is that right so
I mean they're doing some crazy things
you have no idea the crazy stuff they're
doing in the oncology standards they're
trying to make vaccines against uh
mutations on on some of these tumor
cells when the same mutations exist in
normal cells can you believe this I mean
I can't believe how little these the
guys that are in the top medical schools
know about cancer it's scary it's
actually scary when you think about it
so uh then and the poor guy on the
street has no clue he runs into these
places thinking these guys know what
they're talking about and many times
they do I don't want to make it look
like none of these guys know what
they're doing but we got 1,700 people a
day dying 70 an hour so somebody doesn't
know what the hell they're doing so and
this shouldn't be this these deaths
these deaths should not be happening
like this this is nuts let's talk about
cuz I know you're a proponent of the
ketogenic diet which you've just
mentioned as a promising anti-aging
interventions but why don't we talk
about diet and lifestyle strategies I
really do want to get into um exercise
as well and how that plays a role well
diet and lifestyle you know a keto
listen when I first started doing all
this stuff many many many years ago uh
we were doing calorie restriction um and
and we knew that calorie which turns out
to be water only fasting so we were
seeing really spectacular effects in in
in mice by water only fasting but then
we said oh man now who's going to want
to do this they're going to think you're
a nut going out what how am I going to
man oh don't drink don't eat anything
for 30 days well who the you know right
I mean this guy's crazy so we said oh
what can we do to this I worked in the
epilepsy clinics with the epilepsy at
Yale University for 9 years down there
so we were working on on on ketogenic
diets and thing for a long time and um
and we knew I was you know I I started
the ketogenic diet workshops because in
in the field of epilepsy ketogenic diets
are acceptable as a way to manage
seizures in little kids so uh and it
became acceptable in that part of
Neurology uh uh neurological problems
but for cancer um we we didn't want to
say go starve yourself so we said why
don't we do a ketogenic diet it's just
reducing blood sugar and elevating
ketones in a more natural way so then
all of a sudden the diet crazies got
involved with this oh you got to do this
what can I eat what so then we developed
the glucose Ketone index calculator
which we developed here at Boston
College which lowers the blood sugar and
elevates the ketones regardless of what
the hell you want to eat you want to eat
a you want to be a vegan go ahead be a
vegan you want to be a carnivore be that
you want to be a Mediterranean
pescatarian I don't care what you want
to be just get your gki 1.0 below and
you're going to start putting met
metabolic pressure on this so uh on
these cancer cells so
so people always ask me well he didn't
say what I should I don't give a damn
what you can eat just bring your gki
down and you say well I tried and it
didn't go down well why don't you try
something else and see if you can get it
down and if it doesn't go down do water
only fasting they definitely go down
yeah and then add food back and find out
what you can and cannot eat everybody is
their own experiment in this particular
case there's no Universal thing that
works for everybody the same way so so
you have to then experiment on your own
body and say okay what do I need to do
is it a keto diet a Mediterranean diet a
pescatarian diet you know carnivore diet
what is the best diet to get me into a
low gki which is a low glucose Ketone
index then you're going to start putting
the metabolic pressure on these tumor
cells then you come in with the with the
drugs that Target glutamine so yeah di
now exercise is absolutely essential for
the therapeutic efficacy of this process
because we found that exercise does two
things number one it lowers glutamine
that's great exercise itself will lower
blood glutamine number two when you're
burning when you're exercising your
muscles are taking in uh uh glucose from
the bloodstream and converting it into
glycogen or burning it on the spot so um
muscle and brain get most of the glucose
in the body the brain takes glucose but
can switch the ketones but will always
take the glucose muscle if you're
exercising the muscles are going to take
in glucose who who's the lowest guy on
the totem pole to get the sacred glucose
it's a damn tumor cell so he's once your
body is in nutritional ketosis and you
are exercising those tumor cells are
going to be under a world of hurt and
then you come in with the blast on the
side with the glutamine targeting drugs
and you blast these things out you know
for the most part uh and we can this is
where the Cutting Edge is right now how
many different glutamine targeting drugs
can we use some of these parasite
medications we have a paper out showing
that they target glutamine too so and
glucose simult mously it's a package of
finding out what works best for each
cancer patient to keep them in a
highquality exercise State very healthy
eating the right foods to keep a low gki
while they're slowly slowly degrading
their tumor so uh and often what we see
is also the diabetes goes away the
Obesity goes away of course yes all
these other chronic problems go away
along with the cancer this was in our
press pulse paper we published this so
let's yeah know look I I'm telling you
after the last um I've heard the word
ketogenic as it relates to psychiatric
disorders as it relates to obviously
type 2 diabetes metabolic dysfunction
now cancer I know that I discuss it with
Alzheimer's disease patients which is my
primary area of research and so it's
becoming more and more clear to me that
this ketogenic lifestyle albeit a hard
one to get into I bought the keto Mojo
um testing strips very hard to get into
and and let me tell you I had an orange
as an experiment and that pushed me
straight out of nutritional ketosis oh
absolutely absolutely try a Coca-Cola
try a Coca-Cola and see what that does
that it's like hitting the bell in the
circus you know the the goes up and
rings the bell exactly it's unbelievable
let's um let's finish up by talking
about invasive versus non-invasive tools
for cancer detection something that is
very close to my heart I lost my
grandmother and Auntie to pancreatic
cancer and the S and I know many people
who have and the sad thing is it's like
oh we found out then 2 weeks later they
were gone and we had no signs of it
prior to that and that scares me too
yeah well when you have pancreatic
cancer it it can get on you uh bad
without you knowing it much by the time
you say oh my God what's my digestion
and all this kind of stuff it's it's
spread out uh it it it and and if it
blows out your pancreas quick then a lot
of the digestive hormones and a lot of
the things that insulin and all these
kinds of things can be corrupted and you
can go into all kinds of metabolic
dis
homeostasis um but what we do know about
pancreatic cancer like we know about all
cancers I put it they can't live without
glucose and glutamine so you got to get
on top of that glucose and glutamine as
quickly as possible uh you got to start
bringing the gki down as low as you can
and yes it's going to be delicate uh we
have to use certain drugs and certain
ways to Target this because it is a fast
moving cancer but if you can get on top
of it uh if you can get just a little
bit on top of it you can slow it down
significantly but by the time they give
you um you know these terrible drugs uh
make your body weak uh toxic drugs and
and they sometimes do a Whipple
procedure or they try to do these
surgical things to make and a lot of
times it doesn't work um yeah you got to
get on top of that real fast as soon as
that diagnosed and even then I'm not
sure uh we have not yet had a person
with I've have we have a lot of
pancreatic cancer people doing metabolic
therapy uh and the outcomes these guys
are still alive so I'm really not sure
what what's going on um but and I don't
see patients believe me I'm in a biology
Department I don't see any of this we we
we have friends that are in the in the
in the trenches uh that are looking at
some of these at some of these folks but
you know to do a careful exam you you
you got to get those you got to get on
top of that glucose and glutamine right
away uh and be aggressive with it up
front but do it without harming the
patient there should be no uh nausea
vomiting di there shouldn't be any of
that other than what would come from the
the tumor itself and you have to bring
that whole you have to make this tumor
less angry more more indolent and then
once you can do that then you have much
better options and you have to use
non-invasive Imaging uh to do this you
don't want to go in there and cut and
stab and do all this stuff it's like
explodes the the cancer cells throughout
the body and they and they're very
aggressive and we know what they are
they're macrofagos so we know what they
eat uh we know they're dependent on
glucose and glutamine we just have to
get that onto them as quickly as
possible so so managing glucose
ketogenic State one other thing I wanted
to ask about as well is you mentioned
emotional
stress yeah that's a big one uh you know
people people in our society are sitting
in traffic um they're trying to commute
a lot this is we have a lot of emotional
stress in our society divorces death of
family oh yeah job problems and the job
uh anger people are just pissed off
about a lot of stuff um you know you try
commuting two hours in Chicago Los
Angeles New York City traffic I mean
it's brutal on your body people cutting
you off you're angry then you get home
you got a bunch of kids yelling they
need food uh you're trying to relax uh
and and there's always something going
on um this is very different from our
Paleolithic lifestyle that we had for
hundreds of thousands of years uh even
during the Neolithic period people were
outside they were walking they were
doing they weren't sitting in cars and
traffic and exhaust fumes and and having
sitting in front of a computer on a cell
phone all day long uh all these young
kids are getting all freaked out by what
somebody says on on on Instagram about
them or what are the YouTube whatever
the hell they look at you know uh they
get all freaked out they're in a bad
diet they're pounding down bad food no
exercise and the next thing you know
they have neuros psychiatric problems
depression cancer type two diabetes I
mean it just wears on you so you know I
we have a thing here the cancer uh the
way of cancer life no no exercise no
happiness of friends poor food emotional
stress and poor sleep you put all that
together uh and you put yourself at risk
for not only cancer but a variety of
other things so get plenty of exercise
find a friends that will make you happy
enjoy your social interactions make sure
you eat food that has minimal levels of
Highly processed
carbohydrates um try to reduce stress
exercise can help you reduce stress
there's a lot of ways massage ther music
therapy a lot of things can reduce
stress and make sure you try to get good
sleep and I say well try try try but you
know how it is you ever see these New
Yorkers running around I go down there
too trust me I'm right in the I'm right
in the midst of a in the West Village
it's a it's a crazy town over here well
it's just not New York it's it's it's
Hong Kong it's it's all the different
places you know uh everywhere where in
many big cities you know people are
running around we're we're a high diet
lifestyle stress environment with more
and more chemical carcinogens uh and
different kinds of things all together
all impacting together uh producing uh a
wave of chronic diseases this what we
call chronic diseases it's not only the
food and nutrition it's the lifestyles
and everything else that go together
with this and uh so it becomes a chronic
inflamed environment and our Paleolithic
ancestors you know they they had a lot
of exercise they they had no processed
foods um you know all these kinds of
things a lot of exercise process I don't
know about their stress levels and
things like this but we know Aboriginal
folks that when they were looked at for
cancer it was almost non-existent so
tribes of people who live according to
traditional ways and Lifestyles uh
cancer is an extremely low uh very low
frequency so is diabetes and some of
these and Alzheimer's disease yeah
Alzheimer's well people always say well
they didn't live long enough to get
Alzheimer's listen uh Alzheimer's is is
just of I would say a good 50 to 60% of
Alzheimer's is Diet lifestyle problems
you know you do have significant disease
genes the P the prelin mutations and
some of these things yes that make you
really predisposed to that but that
represents what five or six perc correct
and you have you have an epidemic of
Alzheimer's coming down the pike here so
so where's all that coming from diet
lifestyle baby that's where it's all at
so tell me one last question question
what's the um future of cancer
prevention and research for you the nice
thing about uh metabolic therapy is
metabolic therapy can both prevent
cancer as well as treat cancer uh you
can as long as you keep your
mitochondria healthy uh by living in a
kind of semi uh um ketotic State uh we
call it nutritional ketosis you don't
have to live there all the time but it
might be good to do intermittent fasting
you can prevent cancer with that
strategy now if you get cancer you do a
just a little bit more aggressive
strategy and bring in the glutamine
targeting drugs now this is very
interesting between metabolic therapy
and standards of care right I I I I
think people I know a lot you got the
gki the the keto moom meter there's a
lot of people who don't have cancer that
are exercising and using the GK glucose
Ketone index to stay healthy so they're
doing it to keep their mitochondria
healthy and preventing cancer but
they'll also prevent diabetes and a lot
of other Chron diseases at the same time
so but when you go to the the cancer
institutes uh you don't see people lined
up in front of the major Cancer
Institute to get their prevention uh
radiation and chemo uh let me give me a
shot of radiation a dose of this chemo
to prevent me from getting some sort of
cancer it's absurd you only do that
after you get that's that's also absurd
what are you poisoning and radiating
people you you can you can manage that
cancer strategically if you understand
uh uh how to Target those two fuels and
that's the future so the future is both
prevention and management using a very
similar structure uh a very similar uh
approach which is which is ketogenic we
call it ketogenic metabolic therapy
which will prevent cancer and then we
use it to to manage cancer together with
repurpose drugs so that it balances
everything out the only problem there's
two major problems number one It Ain't
Easy it takes a lot of time
takes a lot self willpower and the other
thing is you can't right now we can't
figure nobody has yet figured out how to
make money on this big money big money
so so you want to be able to have a diet
lifestyle issue where you can replace
revenue from some of these other failed
procedures so uh um uh which are very
expensive very costly but they they they
generate a lot of revenue for these
different organizations so until some
entrepreneur comes along to figure out
okay uh yeah I I that's the the beauty
of us there's always some guy that
starts to figure out how to make money
on on a on a new on a new technology
because this metabolic therapy is a
disruptive technology for for a system
that's currently broken um but it can be
uh morphed into something that's very
exciting and profitable for a lot of
people once once they understand the
concepts well Dr Thomas safreed thank
you so much for coming on the neuro
experience you are very energetic and
passionate about this I'm so excited to
show people your book where is it
available everywhere yeah my cancer is a
metabolic disease um you know it's
interesting here I only wrote one book
there's a couple of pirates out there uh
saying that I wrote putting my name on
summaries of my book and I never wrote
those things right so yeah so I only
wrote one this one here um the
interesting thing about cancer is a
metabolic disease I I wrote this in
2012 um and it's selling more now than
it's ever sold ever so um there you go
there you go so something's happening
and maybe somebody's finally learning
what's going on here and they're public
education that you're giving us yeah I
guess whatever it is but it's a lot of
fun because you know it works um and and
it has real real benefits for for a lot
of folks yeah well I can't wait to share
it with the world thank you so much for
being part of this well thank you very
much for having me real pleasure thank
you